PREVIOUSLY ON "ENTERPRISE"...
WE ONLY WANT TO BE
YOUR PARTNERS,
TO WORK TOGETHER
IN COMMON CAUSE.
[ EXPLOSION ]
ADMIRAL FORREST
HAS BEEN KILLED.
THE DNA ON THE BOMB'S CONTROLS
WAS LEFT BY THIS WOMAN, T'PAU.
THE ANSWERS YOU NEED
ARE ON VULCAN.
TO TAKE THIS INVESTIGATION,
AND HOWEVER FAR YOU HAVE
YOU HAVE MY SUPPORT.
THIS IS A DESERT CALLED
THE FORGE.
THE ROUTE'S THE ONE SURAK
SUPPOSEDLY FOLLOWED.
THE GUARD RECOGNIZED THE PERSON
WHO BROUGHT IN THE BOMB
WE FOUND IN THE RUBBLE.
-T'PAU.
-NO.
-WHAT'S A KATRA?
-IT WAS YOU.
THE ESSENCE OF A VULCAN MIND,
SYRRANNITES CLAIM IT'S
FROM THE BODY BEFORE DEATH.
THAT IT CAN BE TRANSFERRED
WITH THE ATTACK ON YOUR EMBASSY.
V'LAS WAS INVOLVED
HE'S RESPONSIBLE FOR BLAMING IT
ON THE SYRRANNITES.
BEFORE WE ANNOUNCE
OUR DECISION,
IS THERE ANYTHING
YOU WISH TO SAY?
MY ACTIONS WERE TAKEN
IN THE BEST INTEREST OF VULCAN
AND THE HIGH COMMAND.
KEEPING SECRETS FROM US
IS IN OUR BEST INTEREST?
MY ABILITIES AS A MELDER,
HAD I REVEALED
WOULD NOT HAVE BEEN POSSIBLE.
MY YEARS OF SERVICE
HAVE BEEN NOTEWORTHY.
YOUR ACCOMPLISHMENTS
THEY DON'T JUSTIFY DECEPTION.
DECEPTION HAS NEVER BEEN
A STRANGER TO THIS ROOM.
I CAUTION YOU.
ONE OF OUR OWN MEMBERS
WAS RESPONSIBLE
FOR BOMBING THE EARTH EMBASSY,
BLAME ON THE SYRRANNITES.
AN ACT WE TRIED TO
THAT ASSESSMENT WAS CORRECT.
HAS REVEALED HE'S A SYRRANNITE.
OUR INVESTIGATION OF STEL
DIFFICULT TO ACCEPT.
I FIND THAT
WERE DISCOVERED IN HIS HOME.
NUMEROUS DOCUMENTS
THE EVIDENCE IS IRREFUTABLE.
SYRRANNITES WERE RESPONSIBLE,
AND THEY'LL BE DEALT WITH
ACCORDINGLY.
REGARDING THE MATTER AT HAND,
YOUR POSITION IS TERMINATED
IMMEDIATELY.
ALL CLASSIFIED MATERIALS
YOU'RE TO SURRENDER
TO THE SECURITY DIRECTORATE
BEFORE LEAVING.
LOYALTY OATH IS STILL IN EFFECT.
I REMIND YOU THAT YOUR
VIOLATION OF THAT OATH --
-I'M AWARE OF THE PENALTY.
-GOOD.
ELSE YOU'D LIKE TO SAY?
IS THERE ANYTHING
THERE'S A GREAT DEAL THAT NEEDS
TO BE SAID, EXCELLENCY,
WILLING TO LISTEN.
BUT NO ONE'S
♪ IT'S BEEN A LONG ROAD ♪
♪ GETTING FROM THERE TO HERE ♪
♪ IT'S BEEN A LONG TIME ♪
♪ BUT MY TIME IS FINALLY NEAR ♪
♪ AND I WILL SEE MY DREAM
COME ALIVE AT LAST ♪
♪ I WILL TOUCH THE SKY ♪
♪ AND THEY'RE NOT GONNA
HOLD ME DOWN NO MORE ♪
♪ NO, THEY'RE NOT GONNA
CHANGE MY MIND ♪
♪ 'CAUSE I'VE GOT FAITH ♪
♪ OF THE HEART ♪
♪ I'M GOING WHERE MY HEART
WILL TAKE ME ♪
♪ I'VE GOT FAITH TO BELIEVE ♪
♪ I CAN DO ANYTHING ♪
♪ I'VE GOT STRENGTH
OF THE SOUL ♪
♪ AND NO ONE'S GONNA BEND
OR BREAK ME ♪
♪ I CAN REACH ANY STAR ♪
♪ I'VE GOT FAITH ♪
♪ I'VE GOT, I'VE GOT, I'VE GOT ♪
♪ FAITH OF THE HEART ♪
WHO ARE YOU?
I'M JONATHAN ARCHER.
CAPTAIN OF THE EARTH VESSEL.
AND YOU MUST BE T'POL.
YOU ARE A LONG WAY
FROM ENTERPRISE.
WHO BOMBED THE EARTH EMBASSY.
I'M HERE TO FIND THE PERSON
HER NAME IS T'PAU.
A HELL OF A LOT LIKE YOU.
AND SHE LOOKS
I AM T'PAU.
ALONG WITH 40 OTHER PEOPLE.
YOU MURDERED MY FRIEND,
THE DESTRUCTION OF YOUR EMBASSY.
I HAD NOTHING TO DO WITH
THE EVIDENCE SAYS YOU DID.
I HAVEN'T LEFT THIS DESERT
FOR 2 YEARS.
WHAT DOES THAT TELL YOU
ABOUT YOUR EVIDENCE?
IT TELLS ME THAT YOU'RE LYING.
YOU HAVE A LOT TO LEARN
ABOUT SYRRANNITES.
ABOUT HUMANS.
WE DON'T SIT BACK AND DO NOTHING
WHILE OUR PEOPLE ARE ATTACKED.
NO, YOU TRAVERSE
VAST WASTELANDS,
BASED ON FALSE INFORMATION.
WHAT DID YOU PLAN TO DO
WHEN YOU FOUND ME --
PLACE ME UNDER ARREST?
SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
ABOUT YOUR SPECIES IS ACCURATE.
IT SEEMS EVERYTHING I'VE HEARD
MOTHER.
THAT YOU'RE ALL RIGHT.
I'M PLEASED TO SEE
WE HAVE A GREAT DEAL
TO TALK ABOUT.
-AGREED.
-YOU TOLD THEM
WHERE TO FIND US.
-YES.
-IS THERE ANYONE
ELSE WITH YOU?
NO.
TO HAVE CROSSED THE FORGE
BY YOURSELVES
WITH THE SANDFIRE STORMS
THIS TIME OF YEAR?
HE HELPED US FIND SHELTER.
WE MET A SYRRANNITE.
WHO WAS THIS PERSON?
HIS NAME WAS AREV.
BY AN ELECTRICAL CHARGE.
HE WAS STRUCK DOWN
HE DIDN'T MAKE IT.
HE'S DEAD?
HIS NAME WAS AREV?
ARE YOU CERTAIN
THAT'S WHAT HE TOLD US.
HIS TRUE NAME WAS SYRRAN.
HE WAS OUR LEADER.
[ DOOR CREAKS ]
[ SIGHING ]
CAPTAIN, ARE YOU ALL RIGHT?
YEAH, I'M OKAY.
[ SIGHS ]
RIGHT BEFORE AREV DIED,
HE GRABBED ME.
HE...PUT HIS HAND
ON MY FOREHEAD.
INSIDE...MY HEAD.
I FELT SOMETHING
HE WAS TRYING TO MELD WITH YOU?
DO YOU THINK
I DON'T KNOW.
I HAVEN'T BEEN MYSELF.
BUT EVER SINCE,
WHAT IF THEY'D BEEN FOLLOWED?
YOU PUT US ALL IN DANGER.
I ONLY WANTED HER TO KNOW
I WAS SAFE.
YOU COULD HAVE ACCOMPLISHED THAT
WITHOUT REVEALING OUR LOCATION.
I CAN'T CHANGE WHAT I'VE DONE.
SHE DOESN'T DESERVE
IMPRISONMENT.
I WANT HER RELEASED.
NOT UNTIL WE'VE CONFIRMED
THEIR STORY.
MY DAUGHTER WOULDN'T LIE.
SHE'S NOT MERELY
YOUR DAUGHTER --
SHE'S A MEMBER OF STARFLEET,
AND STARFLEET IS ALLIED
WITH THE HIGH COMMAND.
THEY'LL BOTH REMAIN
WHERE THEY ARE
UNTIL I'M SATISFIED
THEY CAN BE TRUSTED.
[ ENGINE HUMMING ]
ARE FLYING DAY AND NIGHT.
THE SEARCH PATROLS
OF OUR WORRIES NOW.
THEY'RE THE LEAST
IF SYRRAN IS DEAD...
WE'VE WORKED FOR IS LOST.
...THEN EVERYTHING
THEY THREW YOU OUT.
I CAN'T BELIEVE
JUST BECAUSE YOU HELPED US?
I KNEW THE RISKS.
THERE'S GOT TO BE SOME WAY
YOU CAN FIGHT THIS.
I COULD PROTEST, BUT IT WOULDN'T
ACCOMPLISH ANYTHING.
TO CHANGE HIS MIND.
V'LAS ISN'T ONE
WHO THE HELL PUT HIM IN CHARGE,
ANYWAY?
OUR SOCIETY REWARDS MERIT.
A SINGULAR TALENT FOR GOVERNING.
V'LAS HAS DEMONSTRATED
WHAT ARE YOU GONNA DO NOW?
IF YOU'RE REFERRING
TO MY CAREER,
I HAVEN'T GIVEN IT
MUCH THOUGHT.
THERE'S SOMETHING MORE IMPORTANT
WE NEED TO DISCUSS.
WITH T'POL OR YOUR CAPTAIN?
HAVE YOU MADE CONTACT
AND THEY CAN'T REACH US.
WE CAN'T REACH THEM,
TO WIPE OUT THE SYRRANNITES.
V'LAS IS DETERMINED
HE'S PARTICULARLY INTENT
THEIR ENCAMPMENT IN THE FORGE.
ON DESTROYING
AND T'POL ARE HEADED.
WHERE THE CAPTAIN
THEY MAY BE IN GRAVE DANGER.
[ INDISTINCT CONVERSATIONS ]
QUESTIONS FOR ME.
YOU MUST HAVE
I CAN'T UNDERSTAND HOW YOU COULD
JOIN THESE PEOPLE.
I'VE BEEN GROWING DISILLUSIONED
WITH VULCAN SOCIETY
FOR SOME TIME.
TO RESIGN FROM THE ACADEMY,
WHEN I WAS FORCED
TO QUESTION MY BELIEFS.
I-I BEGAN SERIOUSLY
AND THIS IS WHERE YOU CAME
FOR ANSWERS?
SYRRANNITES BELIEVE
THAT THE VULCANS HAVE STRAYED
FROM THE TEACHINGS OF SURAK.
WHAT THE HIGH COMMAND HAS DONE
CONSIDERING
IN RECENT YEARS --
THE -- THE LISTENING STATION
AT P'JEM,
THE SUPPRESSION OF DISSENT --
ISN'T SO HARD TO ACCEPT.
OUR POSITION
YOU COULD HAVE TOLD ME ALL THIS
WHEN I CAME TO VISIT.
WAS JUST BEGINNING
THE HIGH COMMAND
SUSPECTED SYRRANNITES.
TO HUNT DOWN
I WAS AFRAID I WOULD BE NEXT.
I WANTED TO KEEP YOU
OUT OF IT.
I KNOW YOUR MARRIAGE TO KOSS
WAS FOR MY SAKE,
TO HELP ME REGAIN MY POST.
I DON'T WANT YOUR APOLOGIES,
MOTHER.
TO COME BACK WITH ME.
I WANT YOU
I CAN'T DO THAT.
[ SIGHS ]
YOU KNEW I'D TRY TO FIND YOU.
WHEN YOU GAVE ME THAT MAP,
I THOUGHT THAT,
WE WERE TRYING TO ACCOMPLISH...
IF YOU COULD SEE WHAT
THAT I'D UNDERSTAND?
THAT I'D JOIN YOU?
I HELD OUT THAT HOPE, YES.
I WAS BEING FOOLISH.
IT'S POSSIBLE
EXTREMELY.
[ EXPLOSIONS ]
WAR IS TAKING ITS TOLL.
VULCAN IS TEARING ITSELF APART.
WHO ARE YOU?
YOU KNOW WHO I AM, CAPTAIN.
[ EXPLOSION ]
SO MUCH DEATH.
HARD TO BELIEVE THIS WILL BECOME
KNOWN AS THE TIME OF AWAKENING.
THAT WAS 1,800 YEARS AGO.
THIS DOESN'T FEEL LIKE A DREAM.
YOU'RE SEEING THE PAST
THROUGH MY EYES.
SYRRAN DID SOMETHING TO ME
BEFORE HE DIED.
HE CHOSE YOU.
[ CHUCKLES ]
YOU DON'T TRUST VULCANS,
CAPTAIN.
THEM, I CAN'T SAY I BLAME YOU.
GIVEN YOUR EXPERIENCES WITH
THE CULTURE YOU'VE COME TO KNOW
I HELPED TO CREATE.
ISN'T THE ONE
MY PEOPLE HAVE STRAYED,
AND SOMEONE MUST RESTORE THEM
TO THE PATH.
YOU'VE GOT THE WRONG MAN.
SORRY, CAPTAIN.
THERE'S AN EARTH EXPRESSION --
"WE'RE STUCK WITH EACH OTHER."
WHAT'S BEEN GIVEN TO YOU.
DON'T FIGHT
OPEN YOUR MIND AND YOUR HEART,
AND THE WAY WILL BECOME CLEAR.
CAPTAIN.
WE'VE PINPOINTED THEIR LOCATION
NEAR THE NORTHEASTERN BORDER
OF THE FORGE.
IS THIS INFORMATION?
HOW ACCURATE
IT'S BASED ON DATA COLLECTED
BY SEARCH PATROLS.
THEY'VE BEEN CONDUCTING MISSIONS
FOR SEVERAL DAYS.
WE'RE GOING TO BOMBARD
THE CAMP...
WITH PHOTONIC WEAPONS.
OUR GOAL ISN'T TO EXTERMINATE
THESE PEOPLE.
OUR GOAL IS TO MAINTAIN ORDER.
THEY'RE IN THE DEEP DESERT.
WHAT POSSIBLE HARM
COULD THEY DO US?
THEY'VE ALREADY DESTROYED
AN EMBASSY.
EVENTUALLY, THEY'RE GOING TO
HAVE TO LEAVE THE FORGE,
AND WHEN THEY DO,
WITH LITTLE OR NO LOSS OF LIFE.
WE CAN APPREHEND THEM
HIMSELF IS INSIDE THE COMPOUND.
IT'S VERY LIKELY THAT SYRRAN
WITH ONE DECISIVE THRUST,
WE CAN CRIPPLE THIS INSURGENCY,
PERHAPS END IT.
WE CAN'T LET AN OPPORTUNITY
LIKE THIS PASS US BY.
COULD MINIMIZE THE LOSS OF LIFE.
A SURGICAL STRIKE
THE GEOMAGNETIC ANOMALIES MAKE
A PRECISION ATTACK IMPOSSIBLE.
THIS IS THE ONLY WAY.
WE'LL BEGIN PREPARATIONS
IMMEDIATELY.
DID HE TELL YOU HIS NAME?
THIS MAN --
HE SEEMED TO THINK
I KNEW WHO HE WAS.
DID YOU?
IT WAS SURAK.
WE BELIEVE YOU.
THE KATRA OF SURAK.
SYRRAN POSSESSED
KATRAS ARE NOTHING MORE
THAN A MYTH.
I USED TO THINK THAT
MY MIND TO OTHER POSSIBILITIES.
UNTIL I LEARNED TO OPEN UP
HE WAS CLOSE TO DEATH,
IF SYRRAN KNEW
HE WOULD HAVE TRIED TO TRANSFER
THE KATRA TO SOMEONE ELSE.
I WAS NEAR HIM WHEN HE DIED.
THERE IS ONLY ONE WAY
TO BE CERTAIN.
I HAVE TO MELD WITH YOU.
I'VE HAD MY FILL
OF MIND-MELDS.
DOESN'T APPEAL TO ME, EITHER.
THE PROSPECT
WITH A HUMAN BEFORE.
I'VE NEVER MELDED
YOUR UNCHECKED EMOTIONS WILL,
NO DOUBT, PROVE DISTASTEFUL.
I ASK YOUR INDULGENCE.
HOWEVER,
MY MIND...TO YOUR MIND.
MY THOUGHTS TO YOUR THOUGHTS.
OUR MINDS ARE MERGING.
-OUR MINDS ARE ONE.
WE'RE IN THE DESERT.
THERE'S A STORM.
WE FIND REFUGE I-IN A CAVE.
SAND-LIGHTNING.
OUR MINDS ARE NOT ALONE.
THERE'S SOMEONE ELSE HERE
WITH US.
I SENSE HIS PRESENCE.
[ GASPING ]
T'PAU?
HE HAS THE KATRA.
WE CAN TRIGGER A MALFUNCTION IN
THIS SATELLITE'S IMAGING NODE.
IT'LL TAKE 6 MINUTES
FOR THE CENTRAL PROCESSOR
TO CORRECT THE ERROR.
THAT SHOULD BE ENOUGH TIME
TO SLIP THROUGH THE NET.
WHAT CAUSED THE GLITCH?
WON'T THEY WONDER
ERRORS OCCUR FREQUENTLY
NEAR THE FORGE.
IT SHOULDN'T RAISE SUSPICION.
[ BEEPING ]
MIND IF I ASK YOU SOMETHING?
WHY ARE YOU DOING THIS?
I NEVER GOT THE IMPRESSION YOU
CARED THAT MUCH ABOUT HUMANS.
SEEMS LIKE...
SOMETHING NEW TO COMPLAIN ABOUT.
YOU WERE ALWAYS FINDING
MORE THAN 30 YEARS, COMMANDER.
I LIVED ON EARTH FOR
IN THAT TIME,
FOR YOUR WORLD AND ITS PEOPLE.
I DEVELOPED AN AFFINITY
YOU DID A PRETTY GOOD JOB
OF HIDING IT.
-THANK YOU.
-[ BEEPING ]
Commander Tucker.
Launch Bay to
GO AHEAD, TRAVIS.
WE SHOULD BE READY
WITHIN THE HOUR.
What about helm control?
A STICK-AND-RUDDER SYSTEM.
I'VE RIGGED UP
WHERE WE WANT TO GO,
IT'LL GET US
but I can't promise
a smooth ride.
JUST DON'T TELL MALCOLM
ABOUT THAT PART
UNTIL YOU'RE UNDER WAY.
CENTURIES AGO,
A SET OF KATRIC ARKS
WERE DISCOVERED
AT THE P'JEM MONASTERY.
KATRIC ARKS?
POLYCRYSTALLINE VESSELS,
VULCANS TO PRESERVE KATRAS.
ALLEGEDLY USED BY ANCIENT
THEY WERE SCANNED,
ANALYZED.
ATTEMPTED TO MELD WITH THEM.
ONE OF THE SCIENTISTS EVEN
THEY FOUND NOTHING TO INDICATE
THE PRESENCE OF A KATRA.
THE VULCAN SCIENCE ACADEMY
WAS JUST AS SKEPTICAL
ABOUT TIME TRAVEL.
DO YOU REALLY BELIEVE
YOU POSSESS THE LIVING SPIRIT
OF SURAK INSIDE YOU,
1,800 YEARS AGO?
A MAN WHO DIED
PUT IT LIKE THAT.
NOT WHEN YOU
THERE IS A LOGICAL
EXPLANATION.
I'M LISTENING.
SYRRAN MELDED WITH YOU
BEFORE HE DIED.
IS THE RESIDUE OF HIS THOUGHTS.
WHAT YOU'RE EXPERIENCING
FROM A MIND-MELD HANGOVER?
SO I'M SUFFERING
I WOULDN'T CHARACTERIZE IT
QUITE THAT WAY...
BUT, ESSENTIALLY.
IT FEELS LIKE...
...MORE THAN THAT.
YOU HAVE NO BASIS
FOR COMPARISON.
YOU'VE NEVER UNDERGONE
A MIND-MELD BEFORE.
IS ONLY A PART OF IT.
SEEING SURAK
I COULD SWEAR I'VE BEEN HERE
BEFORE, IN THIS SANCTUARY.
TO THE HOUSE YOU GREW UP IN.
IT'S LIKE COMING BACK
A GREAT DEAL OF TIME HERE.
SYRRAN SPENT
AND IT WAS JUST A MIND-MELD.
LET'S SAY YOU'RE RIGHT,
HE STILL PUT SOMETHING
IN MY HEAD...
...AND I WANT IT TAKEN OUT.
IT MAY NOT BE POSSIBLE.
WHAT CAN WE DO FOR YOU?
WHERE IS YOUR CAPTAIN?
HE'S INDISPOSED AT THE MOMENT.
CAN I HELP YOU?
OF THE EMBASSY BOMBING
THE INVESTIGATION
IS NEARLY COMPLETE.
YOU HAVE A SUSPECT?
THE EVIDENCE AGAINST HIM
AND THE SYRRANNITES
IS COMPELLING.
THERE'S NO LONGER ANY NEED
FOR YOUR PRESENCE HERE.
IF IT'S ALL THE SAME TO YOU,
WE'D LIKE TO STICK AROUND.
THIS IS AN INTERNAL MATTER.
WE'D PREFER YOU DIDN'T.
WE'LL KEEP STARFLEET APPRISED
ANY SUBSEQUENT DEVELOPMENTS.
IF THERE ARE
EXCELLENCY --
AGAIN, YOU HAVE MY DEEPEST
SYMPATHY FOR YOUR LOSS.
ALL OF VULCAN GRIEVES WITH YOU.
WITH ALL RESPECT,
WE AREN'T LEAVING,
EXACTLY WHAT HAPPENED.
NOT UNTIL WE KNOW
I'VE ALSO CONTACTED
ADMIRAL GARDNER.
I'M SURE YOU'LL BE HEARING
FROM HIM SOON.
-A PLEASANT JOURNEY.
-[ BEEPS ]
THE SON OF A BITCH
HUNG UP ON US.
SHOULD I TRY TO GET HIM BACK?
NO ONE HERE HAS EVER PERFORMED
THIS RITUAL.
I'VE STUDIED IT FOR SOME TIME.
I BELIEVE I CAN CONDUCT IT
SUCCESSFULLY.
SURAK'S KATRA IN JEOPARDY --
YOU'D NOT ONLY BE PLACING
YOU COULD KILL ARCHER.
THE RISKS ARE ACCEPTABLE.
I DOUBT SURAK WOULD AGREE.
WOULD YOU SUGGEST --
WHAT ALTERNATIVE
THAT WE FOLLOW THIS HUMAN?
YOUR PREJUDICE TOWARDS HUMANS
I BELIEVE
IS CLOUDING YOUR JUDGMENT.
YOU QUESTIONING MY LOGIC?
[ INDISTINCT CONVERSATIONS ]
Syrran chose to place the katra
in Archer.
He must have had his reasons,
even if we don't understand
them.
The reason is obvious.
He was dying.
Your daughter couldn't reach him
in time.
He had to choose Archer.
That may be.
But we do have a choice.
of everyone involved,
Now, for the sake
I ask you to reconsider.
I've made my decision.
I'll perform the procedure
in one hour.
And if Archer dies?
I won't sacrifice our future to
protect the life of one human.
YOU KNOW...
WITH A VULCAN GHOST IN HIS HEAD,
...I'M THE ONE
DEPENDING ON WHO YOU BELIEVE.
HALF AS BAD AS YOU LOOK.
BUT...I DON'T FEEL
I'M CONSIDERING OUR OPTIONS.
YOUR MOTHER'S OKAY.
AT LEAST WE KNOW
SHE'S JOINED A VIOLENT CULT.
SHE'S NOT OKAY.
ANYTHING TO DO WITH THE EMBASSY.
I DON'T THINK THESE PEOPLE HAD
YOU SOUND CONVINCED.
IT'S MORE THAN A GUT FEELING.
LET'S JUST SAY
[ DOOR CREAKS OPEN ]
WE'VE COME TO A DECISION.
THE KATRA MUST BE REMOVED.
I CAN'T ARGUE WITH THAT.
THERE'S A PROCEDURE, A RITUAL.
THE KATRA TO ANOTHER PERSON.
IT WILL TRANSFER
IT'S NOT WITHOUT RISK.
IS EXCEPTIONALLY RESILIENT,
VULCAN NEUROLOGY
BUT A HUMAN'S...
NERVOUS SYSTEM WILL BE SEVERE.
THE SHOCK TO YOUR
IT COULD KILL YOU.
YOU MUST DECLINE.
WE'RE NOT OFFERING A CHOICE.
YOU'D DO THIS BY FORCE?
WE'D PREFER THAT YOU UNDERTAKE
THE RITUAL WILLINGLY.
A BETTER CHANCE OF SUCCESS.
IT WILL STAND
HOWEVER, IF FORCE IS REQUIRED,
WE WON'T HESITATE TO USE IT.
LET'S GET STARTED.
CAPTAIN.
IT'S MY CALL.
ADMIRAL GARDNER FOLLOWED
STRAIGHT DOWN THE MIDDLE.
THE VULCAN LINE
HE WANTS US OUT OF HERE
YESTERDAY.
ABOUT THE CAPTAIN AND T'POL?
DID YOU TELL HIM
I LEFT THAT PART OUT.
TO LEAVE ORBIT AN HOUR AGO.
ENTERPRISE WAS SUPPOSED
V'LAS IS NOT A PATIENT MAN.
THERE'S NOT A WHOLE LOT
HE CAN DO ABOUT IT.
-HELL OF A JOB, TRAVIS.
-THANK YOU, SIR.
AND BRING THEM BACK --
JUST FIND THEM
-NO SIGHTSEEING ALONG THE WAY.
-UNDERSTOOD.
WE'VE GOT A RECON SATELLITE
TO JAM.
Enterprise hasn't left orbit.
They're maintaining a stationary
position above The Forge.
KEEP MONITORING THEM.
[ SIGHS ]
-Yes, Excellency.
-[ BEEPING ]
WITH THE OPERATION
WE CAN'T PROCEED
WHILE THE EARTH SHIP IS THERE.
YOU'RE CONCERNED
ABOUT WITNESSES.
GARDNER GAVE THEM
AN ORDER TO LEAVE.
I HEARD THE TRANSMISSION.
SO NOW WE'RE MONITORING
THEIR COMMUNICATIONS?
THEY WOULDN'T DISOBEY AN ORDER
WITHOUT A REASON.
I INTEND TO FIND OUT WHAT IT IS.
[ THUNDER RUMBLING ]
PASSED DOWN THROUGH THE AGES,
THE KATRA OF SURAK...
FATHER OF ALL WE HOLD TRUE,
LIVES ON IN THIS MAN.
LET IT NOW...LIVE ON IN ME.
[ SPEAKING VULCAN ]
SURAK.
[ GRUNTING ]
GOOD TO SEE YOU AGAIN, CAPTAIN.
MY APPEARANCE MUST BE
QUITE DISCONCERTING.
I APOLOGIZE.
RADIATION SICKNESS?
WE'RE PAYING A HEAVY PRICE
FOR OUR FOOLISHNESS.
LOGIC HAS NOT WON THIS DAY...
BUT THIS DAY WON'T LAST FOREVER.
LOGIC IS AT THE HEART
OF EVERY VULCAN.
EVEN AS THE ASHES FALL,
MY PEOPLE ARE DISCOVERING
A NEW WAY.
WHAT SYRRAN COULD NOT.
YOU CAN ACCOMPLISH
BUT SYRRAN...
WAS A VULCAN.
AND YOU'RE HUMAN...
YOU ARE UNTOUCHED BY A CULTURE
WHICH MEANS
ITS OWN IMMINENT DESTRUCTION.
THAT CAN NO LONGER SEE
I CANNOT LET WHAT HAPPENED
TO THE VULCANS OF MY TIME
TAKE PLACE AGAIN.
FIND WHAT MY PEOPLE HAVE LOST.
[ BREATHING HEAVILY ]
[ GROANING ]
FIND THE KIR'SHARA.
[ GASPING ]
CAPTAIN.
I FAILED.
[ THUNDER CRASHES ]
TO REMAIN WHERE HE IS.
SURAK CHOOSES
-THE SATELLITE'S BEEN DISABLED.
-[ BEEPING ]
THEY'VE GOT 6 MINUTES
TO GET THROUGH.
TRAVIS...IT'S ALL YOURS.
PROBABLY SHOULD HAVE SKIPPED
BREAKFAST THIS MORNING.
[ BEEPING ]
-WE'RE LOSING CONTACT.
-THEY'RE THROUGH.
ARE ONLY GOING TO GET STRONGER.
THESE THERMALS
[ THUDDING ]
THAT WAS NO THERMAL.
[ GRUNTS ]
THE PLASMA CANNONS
ARE STILL WORKING,
FOR THE TARGETING SENSORS.
BUT I CAN'T SAY THE SAME
TO THE GEOMAGNETIC FIELD.
WE MUST BE GETTING CLOSE
TO BE AFFECTING THEM.
IT DOESN'T SEEM
BETTER SHIELDING.
THEY MUST HAVE
CAN YOU GET US ON THEIR TAIL?
I'LL HAVE TO AIM MANUALLY.
[ GRUNTING ]
HOW ARE THEY STILL BELOW US?
PART OF THE STARBOARD WING.
WE'VE LOST
-I THINK I CAN GET US DOWN.
-WE HAVE TO ABORT.
YOU WON'T BE ABLE
TO GET US BACK UP.
-THRUSTERS ARE OFF-LINE.
-[ BEEPING ]
THE CHEMICAL ROCKETS. HANG ON.
WE'LL HAVE TO FIRE
[ BEEPING ]
THEY'VE BEEN FIRED ON.
THEY TOOK DAMAGE, BUT THEY'RE
HEADING BACK TO ENTERPRISE.
I GUESS 6 MINUTES
WASN'T ENOUGH.
HAVE BEEN MONITORING US.
THEY MUST
THREE SHIPS CLOSING
ON OUR POSITION.
[ BEEPING ]
IT'S ADMINISTRATOR V'LAS.
WE'RE BEING HAILED.
WHY DID YOU LAUNCH
A SHUTTLEPOD?
DID YOU FIRE ON IT?
WHY THE HELL
YOU HAD NO AUTHORIZATION.
ANSWER THE QUESTION.
WE'RE LOOKING FOR OUR CAPTAIN.
ARCHER'S ON THE SURFACE?
SEARCHING FOR THE SYRRANNITES.
HE'S IN THE FORGE,
YOU WERE ORDERED
TO LEAVE ORBIT.
I ADVISED THEM TO STAY.
I ASSUME YOU ASSISTED
THE SECURITY SATELLITE.
IN DISABLING
I GAVE THEM THE CODE.
COMMANDER TUCKER...
YOU'RE TO BREAK ORBIT
IMMEDIATELY.
WITHOUT THE CAPTAIN.
WE'RE NOT LEAVING
YOU WILL LEAVE IMMEDIATELY
OR I'LL ORDER MY SHIPS
TO OPEN FIRE.
HOW IS HE?
HIS BREATHING HAS STABILIZED...
BUT HIS FEVER IS STILL HIGH.
HE AGREED TO THE RITUAL.
YOU WOULD HAVE FORCED HIM.
IF HE HADN'T,
YOU CLAIM THAT SURAK'S TEACHINGS
HAVE BEEN CORRUPTED
BY THE HIGH COMMAND...
...BUT YOU'RE NO DIFFERENT.
A PROFOUND DIFFERENCE.
THERE IS
YOU DECEIVE YOURSELF.
T'POL.
I SHOULDN'T HAVE COME HERE
LOOKING FOR YOU.
ANYTHING MORE TO DO WITH YOU.
AND I DON'T WANT
IF THAT'S YOUR WISH.
HOW LONG HAVE I BEEN OUT?
MORE THAN 3 HOURS.
I FEEL LIKE
I JUST PULLED MY HEAD
OUT OF A PLASMA RELAY.
YOU SHOULD REST.
[ SIGHING ]
THE KIR'SHARA.
WHAT DO YOU KNOW ABOUT IT?
IT WAS IMPORTANT TO SURAK.
AND IT'S IN THERE.
WHAT'S A KIR'SHARA?
SYRRAN LED US HERE TO FIND IT.
AN ARTIFACT --
IF HE KNOWS WHERE IT IS...
TELESCOPES HAVE SIGHTED
THREE VULCAN CRUISERS
IN ORBIT OVER THE FORGE.
THE HIGH COMMAND KNOWS
WE'RE HERE.
WE SHOULD EVACUATE
IMMEDIATELY.
GIVE THE ORDER.
I CAN FIND IT.
[ RUMBLING, BEEPING ]
THAT ONE MISSED US
BY 20 METERS.
POLARIZE HULL PLATING.
TACTICAL ALERT.
DO VULCANS USUALLY FIRE?
HOW MANY WARNING SHOTS
NONE.
[ BEEPING ]
V'LAS.
I'M RUNNING OUT OF PATIENCE,
COMMANDER.
WE'VE BEEN OVER THIS.
OUR CAPTAIN AND FIRST OFFICER
ARE DOWN THERE.
THEY'RE RETURNED TO YOU.
WE'LL MAKE SURE
BREAK ORBIT -- NOW.
[ BEEPS ]
YOU REALLY THINK HE'LL DO IT?
V'LAS WILL DO WHATEVER IT TAKES
TO ACCOMPLISH HIS GOAL.
ALLIES FOR A HUNDRED YEARS.
VULCAN AND EARTH HAVE BEEN
SYRRANNITES MUST HAVE SEEN
OUR SHIPS BY NOW.
IF THEY EVACUATE INTO THE FORGE,
EXTREMELY HARD TO TRACK.
THEY'LL BE
WE CAN'T WAIT ANY LONGER.
[ BEEPING ]
DRIVE ENTERPRISE FROM ORBIT.
USE ALL NECESSARY FORCE.
Yes, Excellency.
[ ALARM BLARING ]
PHASE CANNONS, RETURN FIRE.
ARE FIRING ON ENTERPRISE.
THE VULCAN SHIPS
-[ THUNDER RUMBLING ]
-WE COULD BE NEXT.
TAKE CHARGE OF THE EVACUATION.
WE'LL MEET YOU ON THE FORGE
AS SOON AS WE CAN.
YOU CAN'T STAY HERE.
SEARCHING FOR THE ARTIFACT.
I'VE SPENT TWO YEARS
IF THERE'S A CHANCE
OF FINDING IT...
T'POL?
I'M STAYING.
GO.
[ INDISTINCT CONVERSATIONS ]
-[ ALARM BLARING ]
-[ GRUNTS ]
RE-ROUTE EMERGENCY POWER
TO PHASE CANNONS.
HULL BREACH ON C-DECK.
THEY'RE REPORTING CASUALTIES.
-V'LAS IS HAILING, AUDIO ONLY.
-[ BEEPING ]
PUT HIM THROUGH.
[ BEEPING ]
You're hopelessly outgunned.
Weapons are off-line,
engines failing.
to destroy your ship.
Don't force me
[ BEEPS ]
WE SHOULD WITHDRAW.
HE'S RIGHT.
CAPTAIN ARCHER OR T'POL.
OUR DEATHS WON'T HELP
GET US THE HELL OUT OF HERE.
IS BEYOND SCANNER RANGE,
THE MOMENT ENTERPRISE
BEGIN BOMBARDMENT
OF THE COMPOUND.
Yes, Excellency.
[ BEEPING ]
T'KLAAS --
HE WAS A STUDENT OF SURAK, ONE
OF THE FIRST KOLINAHR MASTERS.
THERE'S NO INSCRIPTION,
NOTHING TO INDICATE
HIS BLOODLINE.
HOW DO YOU KNOW HIS NAME?
WE'RE GETTING CLOSE.
[ EXPLOSIONS ]
THEY'VE BEGUN THEIR ASSAULT.
IT'S HERE.
[ EXPLOSIONS ]
WHETHER IT REALLY EXISTED.
I HAD MY DOUBTS
[ EXPLOSION ]
LET'S GO.
[ EXPLOSIONS ]
[ GRUNTING ]
THIS WAY.
REPORT.
Geomagnetic interference --
we can't get a target lock.
BLANKET THE AREA.
[ EXPLOSIONS ]
[ GRUNTING ]
[ ALL PANTING ]
The sanctuary's
been destroyed.
COMB THE DESERT.
THERE ARE NO SURVIVORS.
MAKE SURE
Affirmative.
YOU'RE PRESIDING OVER
A MASSACRE.
WE ARE ELIMINATING A THREAT.
ARE YOU ALL RIGHT?
I'M FINE.
WE SHOULD KEEP MOVING.
-[ GROANING ]
-CAPTAIN.
[ GROANING ]
YOU WERE STILL INSIDE.
I WAS AFRAID
IT'S ALL RIGHT.
WE FOUND THE KIR'SHARA.
YOU HAVE ALWAYS STRUGGLED SO
WITH YOUR EMOTIONS.
I CAME HERE...
I DID ALL THIS TO HELP YOU.
[ GROANS ]
I DON'T UNDERSTAND.
[ Voice breaking ]
YOU WILL.
[ CRYING ]
MOTHER...
I'VE ALWAYS BEEN SO PROUD
OF YOU...MY T'POL.
[ SNIFFLES ]
[ EXHALES DEEPLY ]
MOTHER.
[ SNIFFLES ]
WE SUFFERED CASUALTIES.
I UNDERSTAND
INJURIES, TWO OF THEM SERIOUS.
ABOUT CAPTAIN ARCHER AND T'POL.
I SHARE YOUR CONCERN
THEY'VE BEEN IN TOUGH JAMS
BEFORE.
WHAT DOES THE HIGH COMMAND HAVE
AGAINST THE SYRRANNITES?
THEY WENT TO A LOT OF TROUBLE
TO FRAME THEM
FOR THE EMBASSY BOMBING.
THE SYRRANNITES
BELIEVE VIOLENCE
TO SURAK'S TEACHINGS.
TO BE ANTITHETICAL
SO THEY'RE PACIFISTS.
A DANGEROUS MIND-SET,
V'LAS CONSIDERS THAT
PARTICULARLY NOW.
WHAT DO YOU MEAN?
THE HIGH COMMAND IS PLANNING
TO ATTACK ANDORIA.
WAIT. WAIT.
A PEACE TREATY TWO YEARS AGO.
VULCAN AND ANDORIA SIGNED
HELPED NEGOTIATE IT.
CAPTAIN ARCHER
VULCAN INTELLIGENCE CLAIMS
ARE DEVELOPING A WEAPON,
THE ANDORIANS
ON XINDI TECHNOLOGY.
POSSIBLY BASED
AND YOU DON'T BELIEVE IT.
THE CLAIM TO ADVANCE AN AGENDA.
I SUSPECT V'LAS IS USING
HE'S PERSUADED THE HIGH COMMAND
TO LAUNCH A PREEMPTIVE STRIKE.
AN INTERSTELLAR WAR.
HE'S GONNA START
ONE THAT COULD DEVASTATE
ANDORIA AND VULCAN,
AND EVENTUALLY INVOLVE
OTHER WORLDS...
INCLUDING EARTH.
SET A COURSE FOR ANDORIA.
ANDORIA?
MAXIMUM WARP.